		The Word-Gesture Keyboard: Reimagining Keyboard Interaction -- ⅗

We have all seen the evolution of keyboards. Right from the Nokia feature phones, where typing the letter ‘c’ would require pressing a button 3 times (very cumbersome) to development of Blackberry keyboards with hard keys qwerty keyboard (a big jump from the feature phones) to the touch screen phones with feature phone like keyboard (yes, pressing multiple times but on touch screen), to the latest gesture keyboards. This article does not present this entire evolution (could have used a timeline to demonstrate this). However, it does a great job in explaining the intricacies of gesture keyboard both with respect to human and machine aspects. 

Gesture keyboards suffer from lack of intuitivity for first-time users. I am sure a lot of smartphone users don’t use (and may not even know) the swipe gestures on their touchscreen qwerty keyboard. This is because press based (traditional) keyboards are ubiquitous and gesture keyboards are not. Traditional keyboards are used in physical keyboards, ATMs, kiosks and payment checkout. Gesture keyboards are hardly seen anywhere (even in 2018!). I believe the gesture keyboards are too good for their own good. They seem magical for first-time users. It’s hard to convince that a simple swipe gesture through 15 characters can still lead you to type the word you intend to and not a junk combination of letters. This encourages users to quit early. I remember resisting gesture keyboards for a long time until someone explained to me how the magic actually worked!

I like how the authors take into account both the novice and experienced users. I can recall one of the Nielsen's 10 UI Design Heuristics, “Flexibility and efficiency of use” and relate to this paper. To emphasize flexibility, the authors also emphasize on shifting the weight from local features to global shape feature (using ts and tn(w)). However, I wish they had further improved the flexibility in the system by discussing the idea of shifting and aligning the keys as per the observed user typing behavior. On soft keyboards (like gesture keyboard), it is possible to actually customize the keys while displaying the same keys on the screen. When a user repeatedly makes the mistake of starting a word from the letter ‘s’ instead of letter ‘a’ (may be due to smaller fingers), the keyboard should take that into account and take corrective measures which actually altering the displayed keys.

I think the section “Subjective Evaluation and User Acceptance” is the weakest part of this paper. Simply relying on the user reviews (just 556 in number) can be considered positive signs to some extend. As an Android developer, I am interested in metrics such monthly uninstalls, average daily usage time and the number of active users. The study seems immature when the authors present a list of affectionate words (love, omg, fun, great…) to back their claims of the utility of their gesture keyboards. Instead of presenting the comments of general users, it would have worthwhile to present views of technology and UX experts (from NY Times, Seattle Times).


User's gestures pass over some letters while they type a word. How does the algorithm decide which letters to pick and which to disregard? Would the algorithm ever pick characters not part of the user's gesture? If it does, explain how.
The algorithm is build using statistical models (particularly Bayesian model) to determine the most “probable” word from the list of possible words in the lexicon. This is based on the fact that valid words have only a few combinations of letters which occur together, thus limiting the number of combinations to a finite number. The words with the highest probability (using N-Grams model) are displayed as “candidate” words. The candidate words are also selected by weighing in user typing history (not discussed in this paper) and custom words added to the dictionary (eg: Spanish words for a Mexican user). Thus, the algorithm is relying on the combination of letters rather than individual letters, making it possible to pick characters which are not part of the user’s gesture (but have a high probability of occurring together). However, displaying the candidate words helps to overcome this problem and make quick corrections (and later reinforcing them).

