	Protopiper: Physically Sketching Room-Sized Objects at Actual Scale -- ⅗

This paper is brilliantly written especially for a conference like UIST. I liked the way how they time and again laid emphasis on what their contribution to the research area of physical prototyping at scale was (using adhesive tape as the main building material). This is a common mistake which I have made a few times, where the claim was based on the applications or artifacts which could be built using my research instead of focussing on the problem I was trying to solve and specifying the real contribution my research would make towards improving the area of interest. The biggest takeaway from this paper is understanding the writing process of an effective poster for UIST 2018 (July 11, 2018).

When I started reading the paper, I thought it was a pretty dumb idea. This looked more like a high school project than research of any sort. However, there were sections in the paper which stood out and had wow elements! First, the use of “memory” was excellent, this allowed the users to not bother about geometry and angle which making the diagonals struts. Second, application of digitalization through mobile scanning app was completely out of the blue. This helps user handover the load of generating commonly used and redundant designs (like boxes) to Protopiper’s system and focus just on the creative and novel aspects of design. I believe the authors are going to use Computer Vision (instead of brute force designing) as the next advancement to Protopiper!

I found the last section (Exploratory User Study) to be the most interesting one. My team is going to build a new Sketching app (for my final project) and this section holds the key. I like the way how authors start with a small introduction (maybe a tutorial or demo would have been better), then allow the same amount of time for each user, and ending the experiment with a small interview to gather user ratings and comments on Protopiper. I think they could have also evaluated the quality of artifacts produced before announcing the verdict on Protopiper. Also, if the users actually get better at using Protopiper and found it as useful as they did during the first interaction is something worth observing. The number of active users of a product (loyal users) is a better metric than number of first-time happy users.

I wish there was more discussion on 3D printing. The first thought which came to my mind after reading the abstract was “Do I need Protopiper if I have a access to a 3D printer?” The authors mention 3D printing in the Introduction section, but not enough importance is given to Protopiper’s biggest competitor. With rapid improvements, 3D printing technology is becoming accessible and cheaper. Some might argue that both Protopiper and 3D printers would co-exist and not eat away into each other’s market (if Protopiper was to become commercial). Also, I am interested in knowing if Protopiper was patented (or authors plan to patent their idea) if they claim their product is not simply a modification of an existing tool. Patenting is my area of interest and I might be digressing a bit!
