I am passionate about learning and MOOCs are a great sources for continuous learning. For someone who has benefitted immensely from MOOCs offered by Coursera, Edx, Udacity, Udemy, MIT Opencourses, Stanford Opencourses, and Codecademy, reading this paper was like a celebration of the idea of learning at large. I can recall my undergrad days, when my school had organized a webinar with Prof. Andrew Ng (Coursera Co-founder) during the launch of Coursera back in 2012. Andrew explained how Coursera could potentially change the way we perceive education in modern times and democratize education. This has proved to be precisely true (also forecasted in this paper). Also, I have seen MOOCs evolve over the years. As a Beta tester at Coursera, I get the opportunity of evaluate courses (both content and tech aspects) before they are released to public. The progress of online courses, from the Stanford Machine Learning course (first Coursera course) to the latest Google Machine Learning specialization, has opened new avenues to benefit all the stakeholders associated with online learning.

The technique of peer-assessment has stark similarity to crowdsourcing, especially when it is carried out on scale. However, there are key differences. One of the major differences being the motivation for the work. In case of mechanical turk, money is the driving factor while in case of peer-assessment knowledge is the driving factor. By forcing the students to act as both the assessor and the assessee, peer-assessment encourages empathy and brings joy to contributors. It develops a sense of belongingness and makes the community stronger, something which most crowdsourcing platforms lack. However, MOOCs can gain meaningful insights from crowdsourcing platforms for tackling malpractices like inflating self-grades and other gaming (section 6.3). A system of distributed scoring (explained in the paper “Crowdresearch”) can be deployed to make self-evaluation difficult to manipulate by bad actors.

For me the  most interesting (and novel) discussion was on “patriotic grading”. I knew that the writing skills were influenced by culture, but never thought that such biases could get reflected in grading! Thus, the impact of local environment reflects in every aspect of life. This idea is used by advertisers all round the world, where a product developed for global consumption can fail miserably if the local context is not understood. This has lead to the emergence of “local to global” approach, where local home grown products (and a local story associated with them) have proved to be remarkably successful, beating the giant corporations of the world.

Propose an improvement to the rubric in Table 5 for subsequent iterations of the course and justify why. I am a big fan of “bonus points”! This approach is beneficial to both the strong students and the weak students. For the weaker ones, it acts as a counterbalancing force to the missed opportunities in a few assignments (due to unforeseen reasons) where the students feel that the work they’ve submitted may not be a representation of their best efforts. For the stronger ones, this is a reward system which encourages them to put in a little more effort than others in the class and become a stand-out performer. However, managing bonus points can be painful for the TAs :)
