Yesterday's tomorrows: notes on ubiquitous computing's dominant vision -- Rating 4/5

This is an excellent paper where the author wisely connects the research and development in ubiquitous computing (ubicomp) done in the past, present and future. The past is almost every time being referred to the times before the 1980s (prior to Weiser’s original paper on the computer of the 21st century). The present is being referred to as the time of the first decade of the 21st century. The authors clearly distinguish “distant future” from “proximate future” which easily strikes a chord with the reader and helps lay concrete arguments against Weiser’s vision of the “future”. This chronological ordering (although the paper is not presented in a chronological manner) is a great way of joining pieces of history with his views of the future (or rather of “proximate future”. Also, the stories of Singapore and Korea follow the same narrative style and this brings consistency to the presentation of ideas in different sections.

“Messiness is the key”. How often do you read a paper, where the author acknowledges that messiness in the current system is doing more good to the society. Authors do a nice job of setting the context (around messiness) right in the introduction. After that, I was eagerly waiting when for the detailed explanations around messiness to start. I felt that the notion of ubicomp to be seamless, especially in terms of infrastructure is rightly contradicted through examples of heterogeneous technologies and their success outside the ubicomp labs, in the real world.

I like the way how authors have acknowledged Weiser’s views on some places and stood against them on other. Clearly, authors have immense respect for Weiser’s work and due credits have been given to his predictions made on how the computations would be embedded in our everyday life (through cell phones, PDAs etc). But, later they site Gibson’s theory (“The future is here…”) to address the forms of ubicomp devices and their role in bringing about a social and cultural impact. Often authors are forced to take a stand (for or against a previous theory) and then continue with that stand, no matter what. Instead of simply taking a stand against everything proposed by Weiser, authors cite (with credits) and criticize Weiser’s work in relevant sections of the paper.

I wish there was more value attached to the technical aspects and advancements of ubiquitous computing instead of just relying heavily on the social aspects. The author does a great job in bringing together the cultural, social and political settings in non-Western nations such as Singapore and South Korea. However, the same idea is reiterated multiple times and it becomes repetitive and predictable after being first introduced in the Singapore setup. This makes the paper longer than it should have been. Also, not enough credit has been given to the technical advancements that have led to these impacts in the first place. Although authors describe IT2000 and IT389 (for Singapore and Korea respectively), these have only been used to strengthen the argument that infrastructure alone cannot be considered a landmark in ubicomp, instead, these are just meant to improve societal interactions and bringing about a collective change.

I agree with the conclusion of this paper.  Even with the advent of the Internet of Things (IoT), the world is largely fragmented. This is primarily due to the heterogeneity of the platform and technologies. Also, these smart devices are deployed in varying setups, demographics and societies. Since these setups are essentially messy, it is unfair to expect the technologies being deployed to be consistent and seamless. The authors do a good job by arriving at this conclusion and breaking the myth that the future vision of the ubiquitous computing is one which is driven by labs of the western nations and presented with a narrow point of view.
